# Chapter 1
## Ten Principles of Economics
### How People Make Decisions
#### Principle 1: People Face Trade-offs
Consider parents deciding how to spend their family income. They can buy  
food, clothing, or a family vacation. Or they can save some of the family income  
for retirement or the children’s college education. When they choose to spend an extra dollar on one of these goods, they have one less dollar to spend on some other good.
When people are grouped into societies, they face different kinds of trade-offs. 
One classic trade-off is between “guns and butter.” The more a society spends on 
national defense (guns) to protect its shores from foreign aggressors, the less it can spend on consumer goods (butter) to raise the standard of living at home.

Nonetheless, people are likely to make good decisions only if they understand the options that are available to them.
#### Principle 2: The Cost of Something Is What You Give Up to Get It
**opportunity cost**
The opportunity cost of an item is what you give up to get that item.
#### Principle 3: Rational People Think at the Margin
A rational decision maker takes an action if and only if the marginal benefit of  
the action exceeds the marginal cost.
#### Principle 4: People Respond to Incentives
### How People Interact
#### Principle 5: Trade Can Make Everyone Better Off
#### Principle 6: Markets Are Usually a Good Way to  Organize Economic Activity
#### Principle 7: Governments Can Sometimes Improve Market Outcome
Market economies need institutions to enforce property rights so individuals can own and control scarce resources.

Most policies aim either to enlarge the economic pie or to change how the pie is divided.

Economists use the term market failure to refer to a situation in which the market on its own fails to produce an efficient allocation of resources. One possible cause of market failure is an externality, which is the impact of one person’s actions on the well-being of a bystander. The classic example of an externality is pollution. Another possible cause of market failure is market power, which refers to the ability of a single person or firm (or a small group) to unduly influence market prices.
### How the Economy as a Whole Works
#### Principle 8: A Country’s Standard of Living Depends on Its Ability to Produce Goods and Services
Countries’ productivity—that is, the amount of goods and services produced by each unit of labor input.

When thinking about how any policy will affect living standards, the key question is how it will affect our ability to produce goods and services.
#### Principle 9: Prices Rise When the Government Prints Too Much Money
What causes inflation? In almost all cases of large or persistent inflation, the  
culprit is growth in the quantity of money.
#### Principle 10: Society Faces a Short-Run Trade-off between Inflation and Unemployment

# Chapter 2
Assumptions can simplify the complex world and make it easier to understand. To study the effects of international trade, for example, we might assume that the world consists of only two countries and that each country produces only two goods. By considering a world with only two countries and two goods, we  
can focus our thinking on the essence of the problem.

Economists use different assumptions when studying the short-run and long-run effects of a policy.

Economists also use models to learn about the world, their models mostly consist of diagrams and equations.

All the models are built with assumptions. Just as a physicist begins the analysis of a falling marble by assuming away the existence of friction, economists assume away many details of the economy that are irrelevant to the question at hand. All models—in physics, biology, and economics—simplify reality to improve our understanding of it.

The field of economics is traditionally divided into two broad subfields. Microeconomics and Macroeconomics.
# Chapter 3
**absolute advantage**
Economists use the term absolute advantage when comparing the productivity of one person, firm, or nation to that of another. The producer that requires a smaller quantity of inputs to produce a good is said to have an absolute advantage in producing that good.

**comparative advantage**
Economists use the term comparative advantage when describing the opportu-  
nity costs faced by two producers. The producer who gives up less of other goods to produce Good X has the smaller opportunity cost of producing Good X and is said to have a comparative advantage in producing it.

**both parties gain from trade**
For both parties to gain from trade, the price at which they trade must lie between the two opportunity costs.

